There is something Jehovah remembers that we do well never to forget.
It involves the way he views us and treats us right now.
And all of us, including you who are graduating from Gilead today, do well never to forget
it.
What is it?
Well, open your Bible, please, to Psalm 103.
And the answer is in the familiar words recorded at verse 14.
And just please keep your Bible open here.
The Psalmist David, speaking of Jehovah, says,
for he well knows how we are formed, remembering that we are dust.
Jehovah remembers that we are dust.
What does it mean?
And why should we never forget it?
Well, first, what does this expression mean?
Jehovah remembers that we're dust.
Simply put, this, Jehovah is mindful of our sinful nature and inclined to forgive repentant
sinners.
Notice how the context indicates this.
If you look up at verses 1 and 2, David begins the Psalm by exhorting himself never to
forget what Jehovah has done and what has Jehovah done.
Verse 3, first, David mentions, Jehovah forgives.
And in the verses that followed, David four times refers to mercy, the tender quality that
moves Jehovah to forgive, and he four times refers to loyal love, the love that moves
Jehovah to treat us as his special property, forgiveness, mercy, loyal love, they're connected.
How so?
Well, mercy prompts forgiveness.
As one scholar put it, God's mercy is the cause, the removal of sin, the result.
And in this context, mercy and forgiveness are part of Jehovah's loyal love.
You might think of Jehovah's loyal love as a large house.
Well, mercy and forgiveness are spacious rooms in that house.
And then we come to verses 11 through 13.
David uses a series of three similes, powerful word pictures to describe first the height,
then the breadth, then the paternal tenderness of what one Bible reference where it calls
Jehovah's forgiving love.
And then we come to verse 14.
David now explains why Jehovah is inclined to show us his forgiving love.
He says, he well knows how we are formed.
David is well aware that he formed Adam out of dust from the ground and that even even
perfect humans have natural limitations, the need to eat, to sleep, to breathe.
But when Adam and Eve sinned, being dust took on new meaning.
Regarding verse 14, the watchtower once explained, David was speaking about human frailties caused
by inherited imperfection.
So Jehovah is well aware of the frailties, the limitations of our sinful nature.
He understands he knows how easy it is for how prone we are to sin and how strong the
temptation to sin can be.
But Jehovah is not just aware of this.
David goes on to say, he remembers it.
And the Hebrew here can mean active remembering.
It implies a response from the one remembering.
In other words, because Jehovah remembers that we're dust, he is moved to do something.
Do what?
Well, according to the context, to show mercy by forgiving, repentant sinners.
So what's the lesson, what's the meaning, Jehovah remembers that we're dust?
Again, put simply, he is mindful of our sinful nature and inclined to show us his forgiving
love.
We might sum up the lesson with three words, limitations, expectations and dealings or actions.
Because Jehovah understands the limitations of our sinful nature, he expects that we will
fall short at times.
And when we do, he is inclined to deal mercifully with us to forgive our repentant heart.
What about the second question, though?
Why should we, including you graduating today, never forget what Jehovah remembers?
Well, for you members of the 154th class, not forgetting what Jehovah remembers, can
actually help you fulfill the purpose of your Gilead training, which, as we heard, is
to stabilize and strengthen the work.
Now consider two ways that this psalm can help you and, by extension, all of us listening
in to do just that.
First, to strengthen the work, be a force for peace and unity by imitating Jehovah's forgiveness.
Now, we'll recall the three key words, limitations, influence, expectations, which affect how we
deal with others.
Now, it's interesting.
We often do this automatically.
Imagine a group of brothers playing soccer, one twists his ankle badly.
The other brothers do not now expect him to run, kick, do body feints.
They see the limitation.
They adjust their expectations, and then they deal kindly, perhaps gently helping him
off the field.
And yet, in our everyday interactions with others, it is so easy to forget what Jehovah
remembers, the limitations of our sinful nature.
To try this, when you feel resentment welling up in you because of what a fellow worker
has said or done, stop and ask yourself, am I forgetting what Jehovah remembers, the
limitations of my brother's sinful, imperfect nature?
You see, by reflecting on the limitation, you can adjust your expectations, which makes
it easier to deal mercifully by letting go of that resentment and thus being a force
for peace and unity.
What about the second way?
Here's the second way the psalm can help.
To strengthen the work, strengthen the workers, for example, by helping others accept Jehovah's
forgiveness.
At times, you may learn that a fellow worker is struggling with stubborn guilt over past
mistakes.
He's forgetting what Jehovah remembers, that Jehovah is mindful of our limitations and
inclined to forgive, but perhaps the brother is also remembering what Jehovah forgets.
The sins that he's already forgiven and will never hold against that brother.
How can you help him?
Well, try this.
Use Psalm 103, 14 to remind him of why Jehovah is inclined to forgive, and then perhaps
use verse 12 to remind him of how far-reaching that forgiveness is.
Verse 12 reads, as far off as the sunrise or east is from the sunset or west, so far off
he has put our transgressions.
How far is east from west?
The close to Jehovah book explains it this way.
In a sense, east is always at the utmost distance imaginable from west.
The two points can never meet.
So what does that mean for our sins?
One reference work explained it this way.
If sin be removed so far, then we may be sure that the scent, the trace, the very memory
of it must be entirely gone.
A scent can trigger a memory, but when Jehovah forgives, he puts our sins so far off that
there remains not even the trace of a scent that could possibly trigger him to remember
it and hold it against us.
Use Psalm 103 to help others accept Jehovah's far-reaching forgiveness.
If you strengthen the worker, you strengthen the work.
So for you members of the 154th class, as you leave here today, may you be determined
to use your Gilead training to strengthen the work and the workers.
To that end, let the beautiful words of Psalm 103 help you to number one, be a force for
peace and unity by imitating Jehovah's forgiveness, and number two, help downhearted ones to accept
that far-reaching forgiveness.
The lesson for you is really a lesson for us all.
May we never forget what Jehovah remembers, and while we're at it, may we also
do our best not to remember what Jehovah forgets.